.TH total 1 "17 Mar 2000" "total 0.9"

.SH NAME
total \- total and subtotal numeric columns in a text file according to field keys

.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "total [-Ndv] <key-cols> <data-columns> <file>
.sp

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B total
reads a text file of columnar data in text and numeric format.
By default, columns are separated by one or more whitespace
characters.  The -F option allows on to choose a separation
character.  In this case exactly one separation character 
lies between columns.

.B total
forms data keys from combinations of text and numeric columns.
and for each key value it can summarize numeric
columns, either by average, sum, minimum or maximum.  
After reading the file it prints a summary of each key
combination found in the file along with the summarized data.
Optionally, you can summarize entire columns without
regard to key values.

.SH OUTPUT 
.B total
prints one line of output for each key combination.  Each 
line contains 0 or more key fields, and 1 or more summarization fields
(if there are 0 keys, then all records are summarized together - they
are not broken down by key).

.SH EXAMPLE
Consider the following data file where the five columns
represent city, state, month, precipitation and average temp.

   columbus ohio  jan   3  25
   columbus ohio  feb   2  20
   columbus ohio  mar   5  32
   akron ohio  jan   5  22
   akron ohio  feb   8  18
   akron ohio  mar   3  28
   bridgeport ct jan 5 29
   bridgeport ct feb 1 32
   bridgeport ct mar 3 41

suppose we want the average temperature for these three cities over Jan, Feb, Mar.
The command would be this,

   total 1,2 5a state.fil

.B total
uses columns 1 and 2 as data keys.  Then for each unique combination
of city (column 1) and state (column 2) it takes the average temperature.
The output looks like this (note that output is sorted by key)

   akron ohio 2.266667e+01
   bridgeport connecticut 34
   columbus ohio 2.566667e+01


If we want total precipitation for each city, 

   total 1,2 4 state.fil

and the output is

   akron ohio 16
   bridgeport connecticut 9
   columbus ohio 10

If we want average temperature across each state we could try

   total 2 5a state.fil

and get

   ohio 2.416667e+01
   connecticut 34

Finally, if we want the maximum temperature for the entire file
we could do

   total - 5x state.fil

and get

   41


.SH KEY COLUMNS

The first parameter specifies the key columns.  This is a comma delimited list
of columns numbers with no whitespace.  The columns are numbered starting at
column 1.  In the first example above we used columns 1 and 2 (city and state)
for our keys.  

There is also a special value '-' which tells
.B total
not to separate values into keys, but to summarize the entire file.

.SH DATA COLUMNS

The second parameter specifies data columns and the action on the
data column.  This is a comma delimited list
with no white space.  Each data column
specification consists of a column number and an optional
command in the form of a single letter.  The default command
is to sun the column.  The letter commands perform the 
following operations on the column.

   a  Average.
   d  Standard deviation.
   e  Error in average.
   m  Minimum.
   x  Maximum.
   n  Number of rows.
   s  Sum.
   f  Column value from first row.
   l  Column value from last row.


.SH STATISTICAL FUNCTIONS

Total can calculate averages, standard deviations and error in the average.
Standard deviations are calculated using N
degrees of freedom where N is the number of data points.  
The "error in the average" is the expected error in the average 
calculated on N data points
compared to the "true" average, 
that is the average that would result from
averaging over a infinite number of data points.

.SH OUTPUT COLUMNS

For every key column and data column total produce an output column.
The order in which the columns are written is the same as the
order in which the key columns, and then data columns are specified
on the command line.  For example, if you use the command

    total 3,1  5,6,8,7  data.fil

the output file will have 6 columns, the first output column is
carried from column 3 of the input file, the second output column
is carried from column 1 of the input file, the third output column
from column 5 of the input file, and so on.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B "-v"
Prints version and number of default hash table slots (actual
number of slots adjustable via -n option).

.TP
.B "-d"
Enter debugging mode, writes out various info.

.TP
.B "-N <nslots>"
Set number of hash table slots.


.SH BUGS
Report any to jon.rifkin@uconn.edu.

.SH AUTHOR
j rifkin <jon.rifkin@uconn.edu>
.br
http://www.sp.uconn.edu/~jrifkin

.SH VERSION
0.5 May 10, 2000
